The idea that we all have to get past
the same finish line at the same time in
order for things to work out right, we
all have to be saved before we die or
something like this, that doesn't make
nearly as much sense as we are we are
developing flower garden. We are
different types of flowers which are
developing and emerging over large
periods of time.
>> Keep watching to learn more.
>> Book four in the new thinking aloud
dialogue series is Charles T. Tart 70
years of exploring consciousness and
parasycchology
now available on Amazon.
>> New thinking Aloud is presented by the
California Institute for Human Science,
a fully accredited university offering
distant learning graduate degrees that
focus on mind, body, and spirit. The
topics that we cover here. We are
particularly excited to announce new
degrees emphasizing parasychology and
the paranormal. Visit their website at
cihs.edu.
[Music]
Thinking aloud.
Conversations on the leading edge of
knowledge and discovery with
psychologist Jeffrey Michionlo.
[Music]
Hello and welcome. I'm Emmy Vades,
co-host with Jeffrey Michionlo. Our
topic today is collective karma and
reincarnation with my guest Chris Bash,
who is professor emmeritus in the
department of philosophy and religious
studies at Youngstown State University
in Ohio, where he taught for 33 years.
He is also adjunct faculty at the
California Institute of Integral
Studies, ameritus fellow at the
Institute of Noetic Sciences and on the
advisory council of Grath Legacy
Training. Chris is author of four books.
Life Cycles: Reincarnation and the Web
of Life, Dark Night, Early Dawn, The
Living Classroom, Teaching and
Collective Consciousness, and LSD in the
Mind of the Universe, Diamonds from
Heaven. If you enjoy this program,
please like, subscribe, press the bell
icon, and share. Chris is joining us
from just north of Asheville in
Weaverville, North Carolina. Now I'll
switch over to the internet video.
Welcome Chris. It is a great joy to be
with you on New Thinking Aloud today.
>> Thank you Emmy. It's wonderful to be in
conversation with you.
>> This is our second interview together
although we also had a live stream. And
in that first conversation, we talked
about your great book, LSD in the Mind
of the Universe, Diamonds from Heaven.
And I'll link to that interview in the
upper right corner of the screen. In
your book and in that conversation, you
shared about how through your 73 LSD
sessions, you experienced many deaths
and rebirths.
And today we're going to explore the
notion that it sounds like you came to
an understanding of that we all have our
own individual or personal karma and
that we do reincarnate for the
collective good or benefit of all toward
what you describe as the future human.
>> Yeah.
>> To get us started, how did you become
interested in this topic of
personal but also collective karma and
reincarnation?
Well, the first book I wrote as an
academic was life cycles, reincarnation
and the web of life. So, I was
interested in reincarnation early in my
career. I encountered Ian Stevenson's
research at the University of Virginia
at about the same time I encountered
Stan Gra's research in his book Realms
of the Human Unconscious.
So I really I took in Stephvenson's
research, you know, deeply and I began
to see the world in a way that I had
never seen it before. I began to see the
world in terms of reincarnation through
a a lens of reincarnation,
understanding that every life is
continuation of lives lived in the past
and is leading towards lives in the
future. So I began to study the evidence
for reincarnation and I studied a lot of
past life therapy cases and I began to
to sort of understand the deeper
mechanisms of how lives start many
things they don't get finished and they
sometimes experience injury and wounds
that don't get healed or they have hopes
and expectations that are not fulfilled
and those transfer into subsequent
former lives not in a simple or
simplistic way but in a very complex and
subtle way that we are living in a sense
the continuation of projects that began
before our life and our life will lead
to a continuation of projects after we
die after our body dies. So that was all
kind of working itself out in my mind.
And then when I entered into uh my
psychedelic work that was all affirmed
and that was elaborated. I had numerous
experiences of former lives and the
reality of reincarnation is just a fact
of life was presented as kind of a
natural
exposition of spiritual reality and how
the physical world and the and the
spiritual world are deeply intertwined
in this evolutionary process.
But all of that sort of so far is all on
the level of personal karma. you know,
personal cause and effect, personal
choice, conditionings transferred from
lifetime to lifetime.
But in the process of doing the
psychedelic exploration,
I also dropped in began to drop into
levels of consciousness that were not
personal but were collective.
Jung's concept of the collective
unconscious is an early exploration of
this idea. But I dropped into levels of
reality of conscious reality where the
working unit was not an individual human
being but the working unit was an entire
species. And I began to have experiences
that were working themselves out in my
individual psychedelic sessions that
were not personal. They were really
focused on collective dynamics. So that
I describe in a chapter called the ocean
of suffering entering into what I later
came to understand were memory matrices
held in the collective psyche of all the
suffering that members of its species
had experienced if it was unresolved by
the time they died. memories of war, of
killing, of rape, of of pain, drought,
incest, just lots and lots of painful
memories. And I began to understand that
just as the individual can be burdened
by their past trauma,
the psyche of this of the collective
consciousness of our species is likewise
burdened by its collective trauma. And
then so that led to a deepening of an
understanding about the relationship of
individual and collective karma.
Individual karma and collective karma.
That really is the fundamental theme of
my second book, Dark Knight Early Dawn.
That has to do with examining that when
you get very very deep that boundary
between the individual and the
collective dissolves and it leads to a
much a much more dynamic uh relationship
between what's happening in our
individual lives and what's happening in
this life of the species of which we are
part and that of course is
contextualized within the life of the
planet the life of the galaxy so on and
so forth and so I just had many
experiences is
of being initiated into
the life of our species at a collective
level. So I I would I dissolved
not like into the mystical state of
oneness with God. But before getting to
that, I dissolved into
the consciousness of our species. And I
began to have experiences
of how the species is evolving through
collective karma and collective
reincarnation
and individuals within that matrix are
evolving through individual karma and
individual reincarnation.
>> Before we go any further, I know we
mentioned this in our previous
interview.
you we are not suggesting that people
engage in LSD per se in order to have
these same experiences.
>> Yeah.
>> It's not necessary, right, for a person
to get in touch with these parts of
themselves to use those substance
necessarily.
>> Absolutely. I mean, what I did was
illegal. I did it because I felt that it
was wrong for these important
mindopening drugs to be made illegal.
But I would never recommend that anyone
else break the law. And there are other
techniques that we can use in order to
get access to these deep levels of
consciousness. This is simply just one
of the ways that I entered into this
domain. I also did three years of
hypnotherapy exploring my own former
lives in that process. Had nothing to do
with any psychedelics at all.
>> You have a whole career as a professor
of philosophy of religion. What can you
share with us about the
spiritual
evidence if you will and then we can go
to the scientific evidence as well for
reincarnation.
Well, I start on the empirical side. I
found Ian Stevenson's work
intellectually and philosophically
compelling. He he and his teams have
done research and and contacted
thousands of children around the world
who have spontaneous memories of their
most immediate previous life. and he was
able to document those memories at
sufficient detail to be I think
intellectually
credible and overwhelmingly providing
overwhelming evidence that reincarnation
is just a fact of life.
Then later when I began to study in past
life therapy literature and I began to
watch and work with people who had
experience helping people remember their
deep past in order to heal, but also in
order to bring forward consciously the
many gifts that are stored in their
past. Because not all, you know, we have
a tendency to think that we inherit
mostly problems from our past, but
that's not true. We inherit all the all
the pluses, all the benefits, all the
the hard work that they've done in
certain areas.
In my meditation,
I began to experience the the
boundaryless nature of consciousness
itself. that. So I knew that there were
dimensions of my mind and my
consciousness that were transpersonal
that went beyond my personal identity.
And then when I went into deeper
psychedelic work,
I had many experiences
which showed me that reincarnation is
simply true. It's just a fact of life.
And that Stevenson's evidence is really,
really important. But it's the tip of
the iceberg because it by itself his
evidence does not give us a
comprehensive picture of how
reincarnation works, how the universe is
working in reincarnation. And there's so
much we don't know. I mean, I want to
say upfront, we don't have any idea of
what the physics of the soul is. We
don't know how consciousness leaves at
death and brings all the memories
forward. We don't really understand the
physics of how that consciousness
reintegrates with another incarnation.
How its store of knowledge
interacts with or interfaces with
genetic conditions, genetic and social
conditions. We there's so much that we
don't know. There's a lot to be learned
with research ahead. But experientially
when you remember your previous lives
and when you you run deep into the
fabric of life so that you begin to
understand that our entire species is
reincarnating generation by generation.
It's not just individuals who are living
and growing. The entire species is
living and growing collectively in that
process. It it's just there's theory and
then there's direct experience. And in
this case, theory and direct experience
reinforce each other.
>> Yes. In your experiences
using LSD and other forms of substances
to take you deeper beyond your personal
self, you described how you really felt
a sense of oneness. And can you kind of
recap that a little bit for us or for
those who might be new to your story?
>> Yeah, this is a deeper theme than simply
the theme of reincarnation. So, let's go
there and then we can bring it back into
reincarnation however you would like.
The truth of reincarnation is a truth
that we are an evolving consciousness
over a large large swath of time.
But there are there are many other
truths and one of the other truths is if
we ask where did we come from and what
are we and in essence underneath all
this social conditioning and
psychological conditioning what are we
and there the spiritual traditions are
are very clear and they speak with one
voice that the essence of the individual
is the essence of the totality that we
can we are at core the essence our
essence is the essence of the divine
or the essence of God if if you use that
language. And so that's another truth.
And then you go deeper into that, you
you realize that what your essence is is
the same as the essence of every living
thing in this world, every inanimate
so-called inanimate thing. So that when
that happens, when that opens there's a
profound feeling of oneness
that you know in a sense self dis
dissolves
in the sense of there being a boundary a
firm boundary between self and other
that disappears and one experiences the
the marvelous miracle of life living and
breathing as one. You are just part of
life. It's surrounding you. There's a
profound feeling of intimacy, kinship.
Those graces of being touched by
oneness,
they can change your life forever
because it it shows you a truth that
even if you can't sustain that
experience, you've seen the truth, you
know the truth of it. You can use that
truth to guide your life. It leads you
to become more compassionate with
people. It leads you to become more
compassionate with yourself. You you
always are kind of spontaneously
looking out for the good of the whole.
That's the the natural and natural
outcome of experiencing oneness is
compassion. That's why in the mystical
traditions, wisdom, insight, and
compassion
move hand in hand. The deeper you
experience oneness, the more
compassionate you become.
Can you describe a little bit about your
own personal experience of that oneness
and what that was like for you?
That's a challenging question
because
to answer your question I have to
remember and to remember I have to sink
into the memory otherwise it's just a
reading of headlines of it and that that
takes a little time
but working within the restrictions we
have one of the things I learned is
there oneness is not like a switch that
goes on and off and but it there are
many degrees of oneness. There are many
stages of initiation into oneness. One
can have a perception of oneness. One
can touch the edges of oneness and feel
the truth of oneness in the world.
But then you can go deeper into actually
kind of dissolving into the quantum
structure, if you will. I'm using that
metaphorically of oneness. It's a it's a
deeper immersion in the living totality
of life.
It it's challenging because
at least what I've learned is that
deeper states of consciousness exist at
higher levels of energy. So the deeper
you're going into a reality
in the consciousness, you're going into
a a higher and higher and higher level
of energy. So oneness with the totality
or oneness with the divine is an
extremely intense
state of consciousness and state of
energy to move into. And in my case I
approached it through going through
years and years of very intense
purifications
in my psychedelic sessions.
When that oneness, when you're graced
with the an opening into oneness,
it's like the entire world comes alive
in a in a new way. And it's like there's
a song in the world that you maybe
hadn't heard before, but it's always
been there. There is a joy and a falling
away of all forms of loneliness and a
and a birthing into an exquisite
spiritual intimacy. I should say it's an
intimacy which is both spiritual and
physical because it it it overflows in
compassion towards the world and it also
overflows in homecoming. a feeling of
homecoming to
one's essential nature, one's essential
being. And it's like, finally, I found
you or finally I've been found by you.
And and then it's just how deep do you
want to go. You know, how deep into the
oneness of existence do you dare to go?
And I think if one goes too fast, it
becomes very challenging and difficult.
It takes time to assimilate oneness and
then it takes time after you've had the
experience to know what to do with it to
try to we talk about integrating our
psychedelic experiences
and I I'm thinking in many ways that we
don't really understand yet how these
profound experiences are impacting our
psychological development, our
psychosspiritual development because
indig people have been having these
experiences for millennia, of course,
but we in the west are relatively new to
cultivating these experiences. And so,
we're taking all of our learning and all
of our scientific knowledge and all of
our, you know, high academic knowledge
into these states. And in some ways,
we're like the first generation to
combine everything that we have learned
about the world from science and
critical critical analysis and now
entering into these deep deep
states of consciousness.
And we're holding memories
that very few people in history have
tried to hold. We're holding memories of
of a profound transcendence, profound
intimacy with the divine, profound
transcendence of time, moving into deep
time, permutations of time, moving into
cosmic void experiences.
And those are living memories. I mean, I
can tell you what I was doing on a
particular day, in a particular year, 30
years ago. They're very specific and I
remember them the way that most people
remember their 50th birthday party. You
can just remember it. But how those
experiences which are so transcendent,
how they are impacting us and infusing
themselves deeper into our being.
I think we're just beginning to map some
of those processes
>> from those experiences. It sounds like
you had a more personal
insight into how everything that each of
us perceivedly individually
do, think, feel impacts the oneness.
>> Yes. Think of it this way. list any of
the list of negative qualities that we
have personally that we're bothered by
and we would like to get rid of and we
would like to transform etc etc.
Those none of those are private. All of
these are part of a social
configuration. Any problem we have
personally is part of a social problem.
It's it's part of a cultural problem. So
where is the line between solving my
personal issue and the society solving
its collective issue? Now we in
classically in western thought we have
thought we're all individual monads. We
can't communicate with each other. We're
all separate self-contained egoic
structures.
So, we're kind of we may be one in
aggregate, but we're really just a whole
bunch of people shoved up against each
other and we each have our own
individual experience. But I don't think
that's the way it works. At least that's
not what I was shown. What I have
experienced is that each human being is
a cell in the tissue of humanity. Every
mind is a light, a cell of light in the
fabric of human consciousness. And even
our bodies are cells within the body of
humanity as a whole. And that just as we
don't, none of our problems or issues or
virtues, we arrive at them individually.
We we kind of arrive at them together
collectively. They're part of an
historical landscape, part of an
cultural landscape.
Also, when we solve our problems, when
we have spiritual breakthroughs, when we
have psychological breakthroughs, those
breakthroughs radiate out into the world
and they touch lives.
Now, that's all spiritual traditions
have recognized this. Christian, Jewish,
Muslim, Buddhist, Hindu traditions have
recognized this collective nature. Well,
one of the ways I experienced it as kind
of empirically demonstrated was in my
classroom because all the years when I
was working very intensely with
psychedelics, I was working very
privately and because they were illegal,
I couldn't talk about it and I never
talked to my students about my own
personal psychedelic practice. But what
I found over time was that my
psychedelic practice was impacting my
students.
And I began to
have experiences or have access to their
minds in a way that was showing me that
my individual process of transformation
was radiating out and influencing other
people's processes of self
transformation.
And this I was completely I didn't
expect this at all and it took me a
while took me years really to understand
what was happening until eventually I
wrote my book the living classroom which
has now just come out in a new edition
where I can explicitly say that the the
practices that I was doing which which
was driving this kind of collective
awakening in my classroom was a
psychedelic practice primarily But it
was showing me that
truly we are in a boundaryless
condition.
Not just in high subtle mystical states
of awareness but we are in a
boundaryless condition all the time that
we are always there's an always a
porocity an interconnectedness
between what's going on in our life and
what's going on in the world around us.
So that I think we have more and more
reason to believe that when we live our
life well and when we rise to the
challenges that are presented to us in
life whatever they are whether they're
you know surgical,
political, social activist, meditative,
psychological, whatever those artistic
whatever those breakthroughs are that
those breakthroughs have a a nourishing
effect on everyone around us.
among the world's spiritual traditions
and religions, some of them are
advocates or proponents of
reincarnation. They just take it as a
given. It's natural. And then there are
other religions and practices where some
have suggested that has been removed
from those religious practices. And I'm
just wondering if you can comment about
that because there are people who might
adhere to a particular religion where
they have been taught
>> sure
>> reincarnation just does not exist and in
fact you have one shot to get it right
and that's it. You're either going to go
to heaven or hell or maybe purgatory if
you don't if you really screw it up. You
could also go there.
>> Yeah. Isn't that interesting? It's
interesting. You know, religions have
many levels to them. There's kind of the
exterior
lay level of religion and then there's
the esoteric mystical high deep
spiritual practitioner level of
religion. And what we find is that some
religions like the religions of the
east, Buddhism, Hinduism, even Daoism,
they they naturally affirm
reincarnation. But even in the west
where reincarnation is not absorbed into
the primary religions there is it's
often present in the mystical branch of
that religion. So that in Judaism
Judaism doesn't affirm reincarnation.
Rabbitic Judaism doesn't at a collective
level butism the mystical tradition in
Judaism it does. And likewise in Islam,
tra traditional mainstream Islam does
not place any emphasis on reincarnation.
But mystical Islam, the Sufi tradition
does affirm uh reincarnation.
With Christianity, it's a little more
complicated because Christianity tended
to execute any of its mystics who were
affirming reincarnation. There were have
been crusades of course against the
Cathars and others.
What when we look back at the history of
Christianity, it appears that Christ
reincarnation was taught by certain
early sects within Christianity. It was
taught in what later came to be called
gnostic sex which were then delivered
decided to be heretical and not
accepted. But it was you know was taught
as a a standard kind of operating
interpretation of Christianity for
hundreds of years. But then as as the
ecclesiastical church began to
consolidate itself under the remember
the background this around 3rd 4th
century AD under the falling of the
collapse of the Roman Empire and a
really disintegration of order at the
social level. The church really believed
that its its survival depended upon a
strong ecclesiastical center and
reincarnation gave too much autonomy to
individuals to work out their own
reincarnation. And so a particular
council was held and there was a
decision that reincarnation was not
going to be included as an acceptable
form of Christianity particularly for
this particular reason. I think is it's
it's not that it's incompatible with the
teaching of Jesus. They never said that
it was incompatible. It's that it gives
too much autonomy. It undermines the the
primacy of ecclesiastical authority in
the church. Now, that may have been
helpful for Christianity at that time.
It may have helped Christianity survive
the dark ages that followed. But now
that we have reincarnation evidence
coming forward from scholarly sources,
there is nothing in Christianity that
prohibits Christians from reassessing
that old teaching and looking at it a
new. We know that from several national
surveys that approximately 25% of
American Catholics believe in
reincarnation. And it's about the same
number for Protestants, 26% for
Protestants. And so clearly 25% of
Catholics aren't waiting for a papal
encyclical saying that reincarnation is
okay to accept. In fact, the largest
chapter I have in my book in in life
cycles is a chapter on reincarnation and
Christianity where I because most of my
students who I was teaching at this
state university they came out of
Christian backgrounds but they were also
trained to follow the evidence to
believe
let your beliefs be guided by the
evidence. So they were having evidence
of reincarnation presented to them and
yet their religious tradition said that
evidence can't be true but they saw the
quality of the evidence. And in this
chapter I'm basically sharing my
experiences with students helping them
understand how they can re-evaluate
reincarnation and what a
reincarnationist Christianity might look
like. And I outline a minimal option and
a maximal option, but trying to show the
way in which you can affirm deep
Christian values and even uh dogma and
incorporate a reincarnation element. And
it makes things make more sense, you
know, because the the real devilment of
western theology which believes or
Christian theology which believes in a
one time through metaphysics is that it
it makes life radically inexplicable.
Why do some people have so much and some
people have so little? Why are some
people so burdened with pain and
suffering and some people just have
so much ease in their lifetime? And
ultimately this gets thrown into an
inscrable God. A god that makes no sense
whatsoever. We just can't understand it.
We just have to live it and abide by its
jurisdiction and hopefully things will
work out well. But when you open up to a
reincarnational perspective, suddenly
certain possibilities emerge and things
begin to make more sense and suddenly
the inscrutability is not God's
inscrutability. It's an inscrutability
that is introduced by believing
something which isn't true. And that is
that we live on in on life only once.
>> Now let's be careful. We have to say
these things carefully. Chris Bash only
lives once, but the soul which Chris
Bash is part of, that soul lives more
than once. So, you know,
you just have to, you know, say things
carefully to make your points clear.
>> Yeah. The personality or the or the
identity of Chris Bash or Emmy Vades
lives once. However, the soul that is
our consciousness or energy or animates
us or however you term that
>> lives lives on perhaps forever.
>> Lives on. That's right. It's like each
personality, each incarnation is a facet
of the diamond. The diamond lives
forever. The facet doesn't necessarily
live forever. Well, it lives forever in
the diamond, but the diamond lives
forever. Yeah,
>> the story of Jesus's death where he
rises on the third day, some have
suggested that is really a metaphor for
reincarnation.
It's an interesting question and I have
an appendix in uh in life cycles where I
address interpretations
which of certain interpretations of
certain biblical passages which have
been offered to suggest that Jesus
himself believed in reincarnation. You
know, we get into a real biblical
studies, you know, u rabbit hole on that
one.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. And my sense is that I don't think
there's compelling evidence that he did
teach reincarnation, but there certainly
is very strong evidence that his
teaching is compatible with
reincarnation.
>> Yeah, I mention it because it is a very
significant holiday Easter for many
Christians and Catholics.
My first love, my first academic pursuit
was in New Testament studies and I
learned Greek and Hebrew and I really
was going to become a New Testament
scholar but I changed and shifted later
on. But up through my masters I was
doing biblical studies work. We learned
that the oldest gospel Mark's gospel
does not have a resurrection does not
have an empty tomb scene in it. In fact,
it it it ends with death and the the
power the influence of the story of the
resurrection was so strong from the
later gospels, Matthew, m Luke and John
that there was an actual a new ending
added in the last chapter of Mark's
gospel to include that kind of
experience. I think that when we ask
historically what is the deepest level
of experience that may lie behind the
belief in the resurrection, I think it
is the the experience that Jesus
followers experienced him as being
alive. Even though he was dead, he was
alive and therefore death is conquered.
Christian theology tended to interpret
that in unique terms that made Jesus's
survival of death somehow unique and he
was uniquely the son of God and uniquely
sharing this gift with humanity who
accepts it on faith.
That would be that's one way of
interpreting and another way of
interpreting is that what he's showing
us is a universal truth that when we die
we are still alive. you know that it
there's a larger dynamic unfolding here.
>> Going back to the oneness that physics
shows seems to be a reality with quantum
entanglement.
Some people really embrace that, find it
beautiful, such as yourself. I think
it's quite beautiful. Although there are
probably people listening to this
thinking, well, I don't want to be a
part of that other individual or and I
know it's not just humans. There's also
creatures and animals and
bacteria that we're all a part of as
well. I'm wondering if you want to
comment on on those thoughts.
I think when we first begin to entertain
possibilities that we are larger than we
conventionally have thought that we are
and that we have these interconnections
which are larger than we thought that we
are. I I understand the kind of fear and
reflex to draw back and say not me, you
know, that that doesn't work. And that's
an understandable. It's a natural
reflex. But if we let that pass and we
sort of relax and begin to look at the
data, if we begin to look at near-death
episode research, people who have get
glimpses, what's going on behind the
scenes, and we look at not just a few of
them, but look at hundreds of them and
begin to to sort out the kind universal
threads that run through their accounts.
When we look at past life therapy
research and look at the you know the
the demonstrated continuity between
lives and the richness which emerges in
a person's life when they un untangle
some of those knots from their past and
when we just begin to look deeply into
where did this come from? Where did this
body mind come from? And we trace its
long evolutionary pedigree back through
its physical pedigree on the emergence
of our beautiful body. And it turns out
that the mind has a similar elegant
magnificent pedigree reaching back
through time. And the more we absorb the
fact that this body is not ours
privately
and our mind is not ours privately, it's
always been a collective summation in a
way always from the start. Then I think
that feeling of anxiety or or push back
softens and we begin to open to a
different world and it's not a world
that that dissolves the individual or
washes out the individual. It's a world
which actually affirms the individual
very deeply but it contextualizes the
individual within a a web work of
interconnections
which is larger than the individual
which we draw from and we give back to
just as a leaf draws energy from the
tree and gives back energy to the tree
and that just it becomes
a a natural way of seeing things. It's
just a it's an easy secondary way of
seeing things. And I'm glad the
physicists have jumped on with quantum
physics and unified systems theory and
all those good things. But
fundamentally, this can be an
experiential thing that when we when we
quiet our mind, when we calm our heart
and we enter into deeper states of
self-aware stillness,
then there are perceptions. There are
instincts which are usually so subtle
that we don't notice them. But in the
space of a quiet meditative mind, these
things make themselves felt. And when
you when these arise, you begin to
realize that they're it's like they're
threads that connect us to other
people's lives. Then you there's no
breaking these threads. They're part of
the fabric of life. Just like there's no
breaking the threads between any one
leaf on a tree and other leaves on the
tree. They are connected into the same
organism.
>> Yeah. And the roots of the trees.
>> The roots.
>> I like how you're describing it as a
collective mind or collective
consciousness
>> that we are all a part of. And and I
agree with you. I had the pleasure of
speaking with Jill Boly Taylor who has
written the book My Stroke of Insight
and followed up with a where she had a
stroke and the left side of her brain
went offline and she only had the right
side of her brain. And she talked about
how she felt this merging of oneness and
could even sense the energy that people
were bringing into her space even if
they were just visiting for less than no
less than five minutes. Yeah.
>> And she wrote a follow-up book about
whole brain living because she wanted to
share with people how they can also have
these experiences as well.
>> Yeah.
>> What is the significance of
reincarnation? How does karma play a
role with that? And how does it give
meaning to our lives or even change our
lives if if we engage with that
potential?
>> Well, that's a large question. So let me
just start with how it impacted me and
share with you maybe some of how it
impacts the students that I've shared
these ideas with, you know, for decades.
First, I think it changes everything. It
it it makes life more intelligible. It
makes the experience that all of us have
make more sense. All of us have things
that we know how to do that no one ever
taught us or we have aptitudes towards
certain types of activities that are
different from everyone else in our
family. Some people are oriented towards
private intellectual chesslike games and
other people like full contact rugby
rugby social things. There's all these
differences. Some people have tremendous
capacity to create in art and music. And
other people are are writers. And where
do those come from? Where do those
qualities and traits come from? And
classically, we think they come through
genetic mutation. It's random. It's it's
just accidental. There's no logic to it.
You got a good luck. Good. You good
genes? Good. They're great. But when you
actually sink into them, it begins to
make more sense that everything which is
large in a life comes from a line of
choices where at some time in our past
they were small. So an interest in music
begins small but it's practice and it
develops until eventually you have
someone like Mozart who's writing
concertos when he's six years old.
So everything which is large even in one
case I'm remembering from past life
cases an ability with guns an ability to
be very fasile and very quick draw came
from a history of a former life of a of
a marshall on the frontier you know so
and that makes sense and it also is
grounds for hope because it means
not that we're a prisoner of our past
but we operate within a context which
has been shaped by our past. Within that
context, we make choices which then
begin they feed into the through our
future and our future lives future. So,
it's a very empowering
position because even though you may be
temporarily burdened if you are by
something that's got a deeper history,
you have the power to change your
history. You have a power to exert your
will and exert your choices, make better
choices or stronger different choices
and lead into a better a better future.
It begins when you when you look at the
world through reincarnationist eyes, you
realize that everybody's playing a
different game. They're not playing your
game. And if it's like I think of it
like school. There are some people who
are in kindergarten and first grade,
some people who are in high school, some
people are doing post-graduate work. And
that gives you tremendous permission to
let people be themselves. Just to let
them be because they're working on their
court, their rules that they're working
on. Somebody else is working on a
different court, different rules. And
the idea that we all have to get past
the same finish line at the same time in
order for things to work out right, we
all have to be saved before we die or
something like this, that doesn't make
nearly as much sense as we are we are
developing flower garden. We are
different types of flowers which are
developing and emerging over large
periods of time. We have an open-ended
amount of time with which to develop
ourselves. I tell my students sometimes,
the only important question you should
be asking yourself is, "What do you want
to be doing in 10,000 years?"
>> No,
>> that's a simple question.
>> Simple question, but provoking, isn't
it?
>> Oh. Oh, well, I'm joking. It's It's
profound.
>> Yeah. It's like, take the large
perspective, people. The creative
intelligence of the universe thinks
large. It doesn't think small. All
right. And if we we have this the
greatest thing about reincarnation is
and it's the Hindus thought this was a
burden. I mean that when they discovered
reincarnation they thought oh my god we
go round and round and round. We have to
go through puberty all these times. We
have to go hardship of life over and
over and over again. They did not think
it was a joy. They thought it was a
burden. But I think we can appreciate
that the greatest burden of in the
psyche of the modern man, modern
humanity is this idea that's terrible
idea that we are nothing more than our
biology.
Everything mental condenses to physics
and that when the body dies our mind
disappears and dissolves. We're nothing.
There's no survival of the of the body.
Reincarnation opens this puts the myth
to that. It shows us that we are
developing over vast tracks of time and
that allows us to to elevate our
assessment of what the purpose of life
might be. If I give an in-class test, a
quiz, I have a right to expect a certain
set of results. If I give them a
hourlong test, I expect more because
I've given them more time. And if I give
them a research paper, I expect more
because they have more time to develop
it. If the universe has a purpose, if it
has a purpose, it should be
proportionate to the amount of time we
have to realize that purpose. If we only
have one lifetime, remember for some
people that's just five minutes before
they're dead out of the delivery room.
Sometimes it's 5 days. M
>> if life has a purpose, it can't be
greater than the amount of time we have
to realize that purpose. Okay. With
reincarnation, we learn that we have
open-ended infinite amount of time. That
doesn't cause us to be lazy. Anybody who
wants to say, "Oh, I'll just deal with
it later." They're stupid. You know,
they haven't really taken into what how
hard it is to be working here. But when
we have open-ended amount of time,
it lifts the ceiling and it allows us to
look at the beautiful pictures that come
from the Hubble telescope, for example,
pictures of our galaxies and nebulas and
the infinite depth of the universe.
And to recognize that we aren't just a
little bitty short 100year part player
in this drama. We are an ancient player
in this drama. And it allows us to look
at the magnificent
grandeur of a galaxy and recognize that
we have a meaningful part in this
magnificent galaxy's unfolding of
intelligence on its planets around its
suns. And that's that changes
everything, doesn't it?
>> What do you feel the purpose of our
individual karma is that contributes to
the collective? What are we
reincarnating toward?
>> Well, let me kind of start with a
a general observation, then go to the
more specific observations. What are we
reincarnating toward?
>> Mhm. To me,
the boundary between individual and
collective
has been made porous so many times
that I see it as one living organism
with different kind of folks of light.
The individual is an individual,
but it's contextualized within an
individuality of a species. And our
species as a single consciousness is an
individual. I mean it's humanity on
planet earth is different than some
other species on some other planet on
some other galaxy. The mind of our
species the collective psyche the memory
of our species is unique in its history
and in its components and our mind we
are part of that. So, so my
understanding is we live in a constant
dialogue, a constant transmission back
and forth between the collective and the
individual to the collective. So then we
ask the question, okay,
what are we evolving toward? What where
is it taking us? And that gets us into
very interesting territory.
probably the large majority of the
answers that we would give that we are
evolving to love or to compassion or to
knowledge or something like this.
Inevitably, that probably is going to
end up being too small because we're
going to formulate those goals out of
our particular moment in history and
take something good and and project it
forward.
But ask the same question in 5,000 years
and would probably give a different
richer answer. So I think the safest
answers are in terms of process answers
not in terms of goal answers. I tend to
think the essence of the whole process
is growth
>> and empowerment of the nature that we
have then the empowerment of the form
that we are growth growth toward what
that that comes the tricky part I mean I
would like to say growth towards oneness
growth towards love growth towards
wisdom growth towards
I mean literally intelligence more
intelligence more aesthetic capacity
more creative capacity, more communion
between human intelligence and spiritual
intelligence.
But those are just limited intermediate
baby steps I think. But that there is a
progression towards growth I think we
can extract from the evolutionary record
and also a growth towards individuality.
I think of reincarnation as a higher
octave of evolution. Evolution evolves
whole groups forward.
It folds learning forward of whole
groups. Reincarnation folds the learning
forward of individuals within certain
species. Nature has somehow found a way
of kind of letting individuals run
forward in time. Where is it going to
go?
Well, we've been doing it for hundreds
of thousands of years in a universe
that's been evolving for 13.7 billion
years and it's going to continue for
hundreds of billions of years yet. Where
are we going? I mean, what what could we
become if we had 10,000 years to work
with?
>> Yeah,
>> we'll become more. I think we become
better. We'll become more in tune with
reality. And I deeply mean spiritual
reality. will become stronger because
we'll be working together to solve our
problems. Instead of fighting over a
small plate of food,
will be more.
>> How can people engage in the karmic and
reincarnation process more consciously?
Because I imagine there are those
listening thinking, well, I have a
horrible lot in this lifetime. I don't
want to be here anymore. I'm never
coming back here. In fact, some people
truly believe that this is a prison
planet and it's run by dark forces that
are trying to control us or that do
control us.
>> Yeah. My heart goes out to people who
are suffering that much pain. I mean, I
I know people who are suffering that
much pain.
And I think inevitably when we try to
understand what's going on, inevitably
we kind of project out of our own
living circumstance.
So if we see ourselves living on a
planet that's that's a prison planet
controlled by dark forces, I mean, I I
can't help but think that there is a a
projection of one's own psychological
experience into metaphysical parameters.
But and I can only suggest that as you
get clearer, as you go through deepening
your experience of your own life through
various spiritual practices, and by
living as good a life as you can live,
as as fair and compassion, as just and
compassion and generous a life as we can
live, your mind gets clear.
The forces that
constrict your life
loosen and you begin to realize that all
along
you in very subtle and often mysterious
ways, you are controlling the flow of
energy that is your life. And if you've
made choices that have constricted that
flow in the past, you can reverse those
choices in the present. you if you've
had bad karma, constrictive, tight karma
in the past, you can choose begin to
choose different generous karma, clear
karma.
And all the spiritual traditions have
procedures to help you move into deeper
clarity. The Buddhists start with the
the five the four noble truths. They
start with the the fundamental truths of
do no harm, do no injury, right speech,
right conduct, so on so forth. Every
religion has these commandments, if you
will, these guidelines. How to clear
your mind, how to clear your heart.
As you clear your mind and clear your
heart, a different picture of the
universe emerges.
One which is not governed by dark
forces. Though clearly if you look at if
you look at certain political movements
and certain social movements and
movements of war and whatnot, there's a
lot of darkness and there's a lot of
oppressive forces and there's a lot of
greed and negativity in there.
>> But your experience of the universe
itself changes it. It opens into a
a divine banquet, a a wonderful mystery,
but a divine banquet.
And
how do I connect with that? I mean, h
how do I begin to change my life so that
I can begin to have that kind of
experience or I can feel that affinity
with the fellow human beings who are
traveling with me? This is this is kind
of like basic spirituality 101. So
anything which you do which
favors yourself over someone else, stop
doing that. Everything you do which
hurts other people around you, stop
doing that. Every time you injure
someone with your speech, stop doing
that. And just the whole system slowly
begins to calm down. And then there are
other techniques which teach you how to
bring your mind underneath all the
turbulence that's on the surface. And we
can just start to live a lifestyle which
is calmer, quieter, more peaceful.
Doesn't mean we're not in the world.
We're in the world. We're making a
living. We're doing our jobs. We have to
deal with everything everybody else
does. But you can engage it in in a
different way.
And as you individually come into
greater clarity,
I think crystallizing around you will be
opportunities
of greater growth around you. We are not
trapped by our karma. Karma is simply a
platform. We can reach beyond our past
and to create a future
which may still have its own challenges,
but it'll be clearer. It'll be gentler.
Mhm.
>> More exciting.
>> Can you share a little bit more about
your understanding of karma? Because
some people listening might be thinking,
well, it's simply cause and effect or
maybe even a form of punishment.
>> Not punishment, but certainly cause and
effect. The the in in Hindi terms, it's
karma vipaka, cause and effect. And so
the basic idea is this. We live in an
entire universe of cause and effect.
Everything has cause. Everything has
effects. Everything. There's not a
single part of this universe which
doesn't have cause and effect except the
the fundamental ground state. It's all
cause and effect. So we don't have any
problem with that in the scientific
world. We recognize molecules, atoms,
you know, movement of things. They have
cause and effect. No problem.
>> Yeah.
>> Now we get to the nub of it. The Hindus
would say and ancient traditions would
say choice has cause and effect. the
choices we make which is to say we are
learning systems.
We are constantly learning and when we
make a choice we are basically setting
in motion
a trajectory of learning. When we make a
choice to push away something or to
include something to hurt or to support,
we are always making choices. Those
choices basically echo back around and
become part of our subsequent
experiences.
One of the easiest ways to describe some
of the logic of this when they people
talk about good karma and bad karma
inheriting the consequences of the vip
technically it's the the good vipaka
that comes from good action the bad
vipaka that comes from bad action bad
karma when we are experiencing these
cycles what's at the center of it is
giving the human being incredible power
to control their destiny. They may not
be able to control it in the short term
because there's so much momentum in the
system. But if you begin to
systematically engage the momentum of
the causal forces powering pushing your
life, you can begin making clear and
clear and clearer choices. And as you
begin making clearer choices, your inner
environment becomes clear and your outer
environment begins to become clear.
For Hinduism, this would be simple
dharma 101. This is just kind of how
life works. We are here to grow. We are
here to learn. An academic transcript is
a history of grades in various courses.
You could say it's karma. You make
choices. You make choices for to pay
attention, not to pay attention, to
apply yourself, not to apply yourself.
You make choices. The cumulative effect
of all those choices is your transcript
at the end of college.
Okay, it's it's like that in life. We're
making choices constantly. There's
nothing mad magical or infamous about
karma. It's just reminding us that not
only does the physical world move
according to cause and effect, but our
psychological world also moves according
to cause and effect and our spiritual
world does too. Except that there is a
there is a depth in the spiritual level.
There may be also in the quantum level
as well. But there is a depth in the
physical level which you discover deep
inside your center that is not part of
cause and effect.
It's outside of cause and effect. And so
that's the spiritual traditions make a
great deal of emphasis of reducing the
turbulence of karmic cause and effect
until one can actually experience the
aspect of your own being which is free
of cause and effect. It's part of it.
There's that when they describe the
one's essential nature of one's divine
divine nature. It never begins. It never
ends. It doesn't have a beginning and
end. It's always present. It's always
stable. Karma has beginning and end. It
runs around does all sort like a
playground. But underneath there is this
reality which has neither beginning nor
end. And so spiritual practice is about
living more in your more of your life
from that reality rather than living
your life from that turbulence cause and
effect.
>> What role do historical traumas and
collective traumas play in what we're
experiencing here on Earth? Of course, I
know you mentioned earlier there's a lot
of pleasant attributes we bring with us
as well. All the virtues of history are
poured into us that surround us as well
as all the the burdens of bad choices of
history, all the sins of history. We
seem to be in a very intense time now.
We're coming into a critical time in
human history. We've never been here
before. We've had
pieces of continents in danger, but now
we have an entire planet that's in
danger of becoming unable to sustain our
population. And it's we're doing it.
It's man, it's humanmade. We're making
the choices. We're causing the problem.
Nature is not causing the problem. We
are causing the problem. And so we seem
to be in a time of increasing
turbulence, disruption, chaos. We're
dealing with a lot of social uncertainty
and social divisiveness because many
people are not clear how to face the
challenges that we're coming into as a
species. We know that global climate
change is going to have enormous impact.
We're going to be losing
many many many lives in the near future
in the future. And this leads to
uncertainty and and
a lot of turbulence and
if we look at this same situation from
within a deep spiritual perspective and
we ask what is causing this inner
turbulence?
Well, we might look at in some ways I
look towards the lives of individual
mystics. When we look at the life of an
individual mystic, this are well kind of
documented and testified that before the
breakthrough of enlightenment, before
the breakthrough of the universal one
heart,
we go through the dark night of the
soul, we go through a period of deep,
deep, intense personal cleansing. And
another way of thinking about this from
a reincarnational perspective is that
we're cleaning the basement. All the
things inside of us which are
incompatible with enlightenment. All the
history which has led us to have
convictions and urges and whatnot which
are incompatible with universal love are
being forced out of the system. And when
and in your meditation
they the spiritual practitioners can
experience that. They experience
upheavalss coming up from within them.
Sometimes they're they're crying on the
meditation cushion. Sometimes they're
feeling unspeakable rage. But the advice
is always the same. Keep centered. Let
it flow through you. It will pass. It
will move through you.
If we kind of think of the entire
species as a single meditating being, I
think something like this is happening.
I personally think we are entering into
uh a profoundly important very positive
turning point in human evolution
which will take us into a higher level
of psychosspiritual functioning at a at
a acrosstheboard platform.
For us to actualize this, for us to
realize this, we have to get we have to
clear ourselves of everything which is
keeping us from experiencing this state
right here, right now today. And the
things which are exper keeping us from
experiencing this is all our collective
karma from collective history and all
our cultural institutions and the
history that we each of us carry
individually and we all carry
collectively together. So I think that
we are actually experiencing a time of
tremendous purification,
tremendous kind of ex you know it's kind
of like you have to expose the shadow
before you can heal the shadow and we
are certainly exposing the shadow of
humanity right now in many of the very
destructive and self-absorbed and
injurious
policies or practices that are arising
in our midst. I think of this as kind of
a collective purification
which is part and parcel of leading into
a spiritual awakening. A deep and
profound spiritual awakening.
>> Yes. Carl Jung and the shadow.
>> Yeah.
>> Focusing on our own individual shadow
selves or letting ourselves maybe heal
from what
ails us.
>> Yeah. What would you suggest people
consider doing as far as do they
primarily focus on their own selves?
>> Yeah.
>> And or
assisting the collective. I mean, I
understand what you're saying that as we
focus on ourselves, we're part of the
collective.
>> Yeah. It's a bothand situation, isn't
it?
>> Yeah. Because while an enlightened
individual in a monastery in a mountain
with no contact in the world may have an
uplifting effect on the whole and that
has that person has that reality.
Most of us live embodied in the world
and we would like to do more than have
an a meditative effect uplifting the
collective from the ground. We would
like to do something practical. I mean,
we'd like to help the world be a better
place, leave it a better place before we
die. We'd like to sort of help people in
need or help to solve the problems that
are endemic to our culture.
>> If we do that or try to do that without
deep inner clarity, we may get some
success, but we'll also leave more
damage behind too. So I think it's a
both and becoming socially active to
work for social clarity, social peace
and to be personally inwardly clear and
at peace with oneself.
I did this years and years of
psychedelic practice and other spiritual
practices that time. But I was always
working as an academic. I was working
hard at an open enrollment university
and trying to raise the corn that corner
that was my garden. That was where I
worked and where I was trying to make
things better. And all of my colleagues,
they had their gardens. They were
working to make things better in the
world. And so I don't think it's an
eitheror. I think some people are drawn
more to the this incarnation to an
individual interior project. other
people are drawn more to an exterior
social project.
There's not a right or wrong here. I
think it's both. And
>> what would you like to say to someone
who may be listening thinking, well, I'm
doing my part, but that person or that
group or that institution or that
country is really messing things up and
they're the problem.
>> Yeah. And they may be and and you there
are certainly people other players in
the world besides ourselves and they're
they're doing bad things in the world.
Any rightthinking person would want to
try to mitigate those bad things. If we
see someone beating a child naturally we
we try to intervene to stop without
thinking. We just we do it to protect
the child.
But at a deeper level, a sort of a more
philosophical level, one of the things
that that comes with the reincarnational
worldview and understanding the deep
deep forces that guide people's lives
and set up circumstances is it's an
absolute waste of time to be envious of
someone else's good fortune.
You should never judge someone else's
bad fortune. We don't know what got them
there. We don't know whether this is a
saint or a sinner. It could be a sinner
inheriting bad karma or it could be a
saint who's taken on hard somebody
else's bad karma. We don't know.
Best to take care of your own shop. Best
to do the very very best you can with
the circumstances in which you find
yourselves in because there's meaning
and intention in those circumstances.
Engage that part of the outside world
which is yours to engage. Mhm.
>> A lot of it is about recognizing that
people are at different stages of their
life, their soul's life. And
we have to take the we have to stand the
ground that we need to stand. But most
of our judgments aren't about standing
ground. It's just being judgmental in a
way that creates more barriers that only
have to be taken down later. Judgments
are barriers. You know, there's a way in
which we can
draw conclusions but without living
within the harsh boundaries of
judgments. You know,
>> do you feel we're going through a
collective near-death experience
even though we don't really die since
our consciousness seems to continue?
>> Yeah, I think we are going through
something like that. You know what
happens when people have a a near fatal
accident and we we know that when they
they're in their their mind speeds up.
They become able to to do physical
things that they would never have
dreamed that they could do. If they're
falling off a mountain, they can take,
you know, action along the way. And the
mind speeds up and often the heart
opens. The mind opens. one begin enters
into transcendent spaces under the
pressure of almost dying.
Now
it's not being alarmist to to say that
we are going into a near extinction
event on this planet. the crisis which
if only now just just beginning to start
are going to be getting worse and
everything we're doing in this country
I'm afraid politically is going to make
that crisis that confrontation with the
planet's limits even harder and more
severe. So
clearly we're going into
very very difficult and challenging
times. And there are some very smart
people,
good, clearthinking people who basically
have concluded that's it. Humanity is
toast. We're living on extended time.
There's no reversing this process. We're
going to go extinct. We're going to die.
We just don't know it yet. But it's the
if if you look at the statistics, you
look at the information, you look at the
patterns, we're going extinct.
I personally don't think we are going
extinct. But I I don't believe that like
on rational calculus grounds. I believe
it because of my spiritual experiences
that we do make it through this crisis.
But it clearly is going to be a a planet
changing crisis. It's going to be a
civilization changing crisis. It's going
to be a near-death experience of our
culture, of our life on this planet, and
we might learn something about what
might happen during it if we study
people, individuals who have had
near-death experiences. So, I think we
are I think things are speeding up. I
think things are becoming dire. I think
there are fewer and fewer innocent
decisions. Every decision has infinite
ramifications.
I think we're coming into a make or
break point. This is we're coming into a
point of grow up or die.
And the threat of extinction is a
tremendous evolutionary accelerator.
And I think we're coming into a time
where we're beginning to realize that if
we don't change our practices, we're
going to lose our life on this planet.
And at core
deep down inside
this transformation that's required is
not simply a transformation of politics
or economics or industrial production or
agricultural. It's not that primarily.
It is fundamentally a crisis of
consciousness.
It is the structure of human
consciousness that has gotten us into
this mess. It's the limitations of ego,
the loneliness, this the the
self-centeredness
of our so-called cut off ego that has
led us into these deadend scenarios of
just consuming more and more and more
but not experience any satisfaction that
really gives us any deep true
psychosspiritual nourishment.
>> We either make it through this crisis or
we go extinct. I personally because
that's the visions I've been given. I
think we make it through. My concern is
how many of our children and
grandchildren and great-grandchildren
are going to die before we make it
through. That's my major concern.
>> There may be those listening thinking,
well, if there is this oceanic
wave of love and oneness, why does it
have to get so bad or hard? Why do we
have to get to this point? Why do we
have to suffer so much? Why does there
have to be
pain and suffering and people being
treated poorly and dying a bodily death
when maybe they didn't otherwise have
to?
>> Yeah.
Boy, that's a hard question. You're
asking hard questions today
because you're you're basically asking
the question, why is there suffering? If
there is intelligence and wisdom and
love as a starting point of creation,
why is it so damn hard? Why do we suffer
so much? Why didn't somebody give us an
instruction manual? You know, help us do
better. Why is it so hard? And we get
angry at the divine intelligence and we
say, we think we could do it better. If
I were doing this universe, I could
design a better universe. There wouldn't
be as much suffering. You know, would do
it differently. But all of that assumes
that we know
what is being built. We judge from the
context of our own historical position
and we make judgments about what a good
humanity would look like or what a
spiritually realized humanity would look
like or just what a peaceful humanity
would look like and this is how we could
build toward that. But maybe we're not
building toward that. Maybe we're
building through that. I mean
clearly the creative intelligence thinks
on a huge landscape. I mean you really
just meditate on what astrophysics has
taught us and astronomy has taught us.
The landscape of creation is vast and
magnificent.
So we have to genuinely ask ourselves
okay what is this intelligence creating
in this species? What is the project?
Where are we going? What might we
become?
And if we expand in even lightly a
100,000 years, which is a a second in
cosmic time, even if we imagine what
would be the best that we could become
in a 100,000 years, could we might begin
to understand
where suffering fits into this larger
agenda, which is larger than most of our
agenda. Most of us would think if we
could just get comfortable and be a
happy human being as we are and live,
eat, and die, we'd be okay. But maybe
that's not the agenda of existence at
all of of the creative intelligence.
>> And I don't mean to treat people
suffering cavalerely. I truly do not
mean so. I mean, it's all great respect
to those who suffer honestly.
But suffering in some ways in our time
is like when we're building a house and
we have the walls up, the stud walls up,
and we have the trusses up, but we
haven't put on the roof. And if it
rains, rain comes in. It's because the
house is unfinished. It's not because
there's any structural design flaw in
the house. The house is just not
finished. Humanity is an unfinished
species.
Shri Arbindo made a large point of this.
He talked about how humanity is a
transitional species. We are
transitioning from what we were a
100,000 years ago into what we are in
the process of becoming deep. We are not
the end of the project. We are just in
the middle of the project. In that
context, if we take disease for example,
we are we are only at the early stages
of developing our consciousness so
clearly and strongly that we can heal
diseases in our body with our minds. We
know psychonuroimmunology
has shown us this but I'm talking about
the serious diseases that seem so
resistance to this subtle manipulation.
We are just getting started in basically
exploring the potential of our
consciousness to keep this system
healthy and strong and some of the
suffering of disease.
It's just an unfinished business. We
haven't gotten to the point where we can
control ourselves that much. Our
knowledge has not expanded yet to be
able to supplement what we can do with
our mind. There's just so much which is
unfinished. So before we kind of take
over control and blame God for doing
such a mess up, we might examine our own
assumptions of what the what the purpose
of the project is, what the goal of the
project is.
>> Because you're a man of deep philosophy
and religious and spiritual studies. I
know you mentioned this in your book in
our previous conversation. And since you
brought up God, can you briefly mention
your relationship to that term?
>> I was raised in a Catholic tradition. I
was studying to be a priest in the early
years for four years. I have learned a
lot in watching religions coming to
existence. And in some ways, dogma is
kind of like sausage. You never want to
see one being made, you know, because
it's it may look good on the outside,
but boy, a whole lot of personality pro
gets involved in the forging of dogma in
history, you know. So, it's a sobering
experience to truly watch how ex
religions come into existence. And so,
I've learned just from the study of
history that one of the most dangerous
things that a human being is can say is,
"I know what God wants you to do. you
should do this, you know, and and
there's so many limitations, cultural
limitations, historical limitations that
are built into God vocabulary, into the
God language that I prefer not to use
that term, but and I would talk about
the divine, but even the divine is super
loaded with historical associations.
And so the in the title of my book on
psychedelic work is LSD in the mind of
the universe.
And I chose not to kind of concretize
that with an image of divinity because I
see those images of divinity as so
historically
conditioned that they weren't large
enough to envision what I was trying to
describe. Now we have a sense of how
vast the universe is. So we count its
distance in light years and each
lightyear is 6 million million miles and
we count it in terms of multiple
thousands of light years and then to
imagine that there is a mind which is as
large as this universe is large and then
to try to fathom what that mind might be
like and then to take a journey in which
you you selfinitiate
into the edges of that vast expensive
mind.
Several things kind of happened or at
least happened to me. One is that
I fell in love. I fell in love with this
reality. Once you experience it in in
its clarity, it's so powerful and so
magnificent and so beautiful that it it
I call it my beloved. It is just it is a
love relationship with life with this
deeper intelligence embedded in life.
Now I I sometimes talk about the divine
as I have here and sometimes I'll even
talk about God
if I feel that the context is clear that
I'm not using those terms in their
conventional references but I'm using to
point to what those terms point to
ideally this infinitely large horizon
this expanse this beauty this knowledge
this genius we're talking about cosmic
genius
in this universe. Mhm.
>> The hardest thing that I found in
negotiating all of my psychedelic work
was not what happened in that journey
during the sessions. The hardest part
came when I ended that journey
and everything was fine. Everything was
good. There was no trauma. I was I had
had been given many many gifts of
intimacy with the divine.
But then when I withdrew and I stepped
out of it and I was no longer making
contact, experiential contact with that
deeper reality for reasons that I
explained in the book,
it was the loss of contact with my
beloved. Even though I knew the beloved
was always here, I knew that it was only
my own blinders which were keeping me
from experiencing it. I knew it was
always the the warp and woof of reality
that I was embedded in. But the
intensity of being dissolved into the
body of light that is the underlying
light of the universe,
it it caused such a deep sadness, a deep
withdrawal.
It was very difficult. And it really
took me about 10 years after I stopped
my sessions to really get fully grounded
and committed to living in this earth on
its terms. Again,
>> I give you that anecdote just to say
that my journey into the divine had many
stages and many layers over many years.
I would not trade any of those days for
any treasures on earth.
And um learning how to live without the
constant immersion or the repetitive
immersion into those treasures has been
a real learning exercise for me that it
continues.
>> Yeah. Chris, how do you
suggest or what do you recommend are
ways that people can
explore themselves, get in touch with
the deeper
creative intelligence inside of them to
be able to
move that karmic part of them forward.
Are there any particular practices that
are maybe outside or part of
psychedelics that can assist people
listening?
>> There's so many practices because what
we're talking about is spirituality
and the Christians have an approach to
spirituality. the Jews, Muslims,
Buddhists, they have an approach to
spirituality with a lot of common
ground.
But it's no secret. And now we live in a
time in history where these previously
secret teachings are now available on
every street corner. You know, after
China invaded Tibet, lineage holders of
this tremendous ancient spiritual
lineage have now flooded into the
Western countries and we have centers
throughout the United States and Europe.
We're talking about basic spiritual
practices. We're also talking about
maybe psychotherrapeutic practices.
We're basically using a
psychotherrapeutic approach to heal some
of the surface wounds of the of the
heart.
>> My first sitter was my wife Carol and
she's clinical psychologist
and she never did a psychedelic session.
It wasn't her cup of tea. She really
found everything she needed on her
meditation cushion. And just to clarify,
you by sitter you mean the person who
was with you during your LSD sessions?
>> Yeah, she was she was my sitter and
holding the fort while I was in my LSD
sessions and she was managing them with
music and whatnot. She never wanted to
sit hers that wanted to do a session
herself.
She has subsequently gone on to complete
her three-year 3month 3-day solo retreat
in the Vajriana tradition. She's been
rec made and recognized as a llama
within her community and she has a very
very rich interior life. We're friends
and it didn't involve psychedelics at
all. So there's so many there's so many
lineages of spiritual teachings. There's
Celtic lineages, so many Native American
lineages, there's South American
lineages, there the Iwasa traditions.
There are some psychedelic shamanic
traditions that are entering our country
strongly now. There are everyday wisdom
traditions that are available in
abundance at any bookstore, at any
airport.
Sounds true. And you, this program is an
example of inner teachings being made
publicly available.
Even if I started a list,
>> it would be a just a fraction of what's
really available. We can find the
practices that can help us live a
calmer, quieter, more centered, richer
life. You know those are available and
the practices which are taught are
pretty much the same. S first kindness,
non-injury, simplicity, voluntary
simplicity,
centering, stillness, social kindness,
social being good to people.
And it it's a it's a long road and it's
not a road which is going to be traveled
in any one lifetime.
Right? So this is a road that's going to
be traveled over many lifetimes. But
every lifetime can get better than the
life before it.
>> We've also touched on the shadow part in
addition and kind of building on what
you just shared. How much of a role does
having a good time, joy, love, following
your own bliss or creativity play a role
in a person's karma and reincarnation?
>> Yeah, it certainly does. I mean, it's
just part of the fabric. I think because
we learn about reincarnation from
reading the books from therapist,
we have a tendency to cast the thinking
about reincarnation in a negative light
because people go to therapists who are
in pain.
And but if you are an exceptionally
brilliant creative
composer,
you know, you can explore that dimension
of your life and find and trace the
roots of your love of music and you'll
find that it goes deeper than this
present lifetime.
>> All of our past gives us all of our
virtues and all of our vices. And we
honor existence by accepting the
virtues, building on them, and then
working to reduce the vices to unlock
their unlock them and let them go.
>> What role does self-love
play in this process?
>> Oh, how can you be in love? How can you
love the world if you don't love
yourself? It's one of the things that
came real clear in into some of my
teachings that if you're going to become
one with the God, if you're going to
become one with all of life, you must
become one with yourself. And therefore,
when you try to become one with God, one
with the universe,
everything which is incompatible be with
becoming one with yourself is forced to
the surface. So all of your injuries,
all of your trauma, all of your
self-defeating habits and behaviors,
these are all shoved to the surface
right inside you, right in front of you.
So selflove, self-acceptance is
absolutely critical,
but not superficial self-love.
Real deep self-love. Love that's willing
to take on the shadow. Love which is
willing to love that shadow until that
shadow becomes a baby in your arms and
you take care of it and nurture it. You
know the deep love really deep the type
of love a mother has for her child that
love is the type of love we have to have
for ourself and so we can handle we can
clean anything that needs to be cleaned
in it.
>> Unconditional love and unconditional
acceptance.
>> Yeah. And love covers a multitude of
sins.
>> Well, let's say it compensates, doesn't
it?
>> Chris, you've shared so much today about
collective karma and reincarnation. And
I know we're going to have another
conversation about the birth of a future
human.
>> Yeah.
>> That you discovered in your LSD
sessions. And I'm wondering if you want
to just touch on that a little bit to
prime us for our next conversation and
what that's about.
>> I'd love to. One of the surprises for me
in my psychedelic work because I began
this work adopting a model of
transformation, the model of personal
transformation which is pretty
widespread in the transpersonal
community that when you do these
practices, it's about personal
transformation, personal awakening,
personal healing, personal
enlightenment. And one of the surprises
for me has been how much of my work
didn't seem to be about me personally at
all. It was about collective and it was
collective dynamics and and my love for
myself expanded to embrace the love of
my people and the love of my planet, the
love of all the beings on the planet. So
it it just wasn't about me personally.
As that deepened over the years, I began
to be initiated into a series of visions
where it was not about my spiritual
evolution. It was about the spiritual
evolution of humanity where humanity was
going. And this is this is I just want
to emphasize this is an utterly natural
phenomenon.
our individual mind. When we relax the
boundaries of our individual mind, our
consciousness opens and deep into our
personal unconscious. But as you keep
clearing and you keep relaxing, it opens
up into this underlying field that Jung
called the collective psyche. And it's
just natural that when you go deeper
into that collective psyche and even
pushing through it to the matrix
underneath that that you inherit
insights into what's going on in the
life of this being. We count our lives
in years. It counts its life in
millennia. All right? So it's just it
opens up naturally. And I began to have
insights
of humanity poised on the edge of a
global death and rebirth process. that
what I had experienced as death and
rebirth and what every meditator
experiences in terms of death and
rebirth on the meditation cushion that
there was actually now fermenting within
history a death and rebirth dynamic that
was so large so powerful it was carrying
all of humanity
in its grip
>> this was a surprise an absolute surprise
to me but it lead led me to have a
certain understanding that The project
of history at this point I think a way
of summing up the a project is to give
birth to a new kind of human being the
giving birth into what I call the future
human some people call it
homospiritualis
homonoeticus there different words for
it but a new form of human being who
isn't simply the old human being
polished up and cleaned up and you know
doing better but truly a revolution that
causes the the plate tectonics of the
collective psyche to shift so that all
children born after this shift takes
place and I'm not talking about a shift
that takes place in 24 hours but takes
place over decades of work all children
born after this pivot are literally
functioning within a different
collective psyche this is something
that's taking place at a very very deep
collective level and I was given
teaching teachings to explain how this
is working out through reincarnation.
What the project of reincarnation is,
how does it play into this, I introduce
concepts that we'll talk about the birth
of the diamond soul, this integration of
all of our former lives coming into a
unity synthesis and leading to an
exponential explosion of insight and
compassion inside the human heart and
human mind. That's what we're going to
be talking about. We're going to be
talking about where humanity is taking,
where reincarnation is taking humanity,
what some of the mechanisms are,
trying to understand underneath the tur
turmoil of our times which are getting
more and more tumultuous almost year by
year
and where where we might be going, what
the larger project is. And I I must
confess I found what I was given
uh deeply reassuring because I feel the
growing waves of darkness. I feel the
the chaos and I see the social struggle
that that we don't know how to navigate
the falling apart process. But I take
great strength in being given an
understanding of what's going on here at
a deeper level. And that's what I'd like
to share with you in our next
conversation.
>> Well, I'm very much looking forward to
the conversation about the birth of the
future human. And Chris, is there
anything else you want to share about
collective karma and reincarnation
today?
>> Well, I'll just share one visionary
experience which I I share in LSD in the
mind of the universe.
It was late in my journey. It was I
don't know 15 years or so into my
journey and I had already gone through
multiple layers of death into deeper and
deeper levels and I opened up into a
very very deep level in which I
experienced all of humanity as a single
organism reincarnating generation by
generation.
The entire
the entire family of humanity was going
through this developmental process that
all of us individually are going through
and experiencing all of humanity
in this flow of learning and in this
flow of perpetual development, perpetual
integration of more and more spiritual
reality into their lives was on the one
hand an extremely ly uplifting
experience and it was also a devastating
experience because I saw
from the one perspective you might say
that whole generations will be
sacrificed in this historical
transformation we're going through and
it had the ruthlessness of Kie the
destroyer of you know of you know the
gods which bring death and destruction
in order to liberate
and at the same time
this was not something which is being
done to us. This is some a role that we
voluntarily took on as our offering to
the creative intelligence in the
evolution of this species at this point
in time. So it was a hard teaching and
it was a magnificent ecstatic teaching
all at the same time. And the key is
then to just to realize that what is
taking place in the lives of individuals
is also taking place in the lives of the
species.
We are all in this together. We're
moving ultimately we all have to move
together. Some people may get a little
ahead, some people may drag a little
behind, but ultimately we are moving
together as we move through this
this transition. and the magnitude of
the beauty
of what we are becoming.
I don't know how I'm going to talk about
that without crying when we talk next.
It's just so magnificent.
>> Oh,
I know. I teared up a few times in this
conversation today and also when I read
your fabulous book LSD and the mind of
the universe. It is very deeply moving
and I look forward to exploring more
with you in the next conversation. and
Chris Bash, thank you so much once again
for this incredible conversation that I
hope many find insightful and hopefully
uplifting in this uh journey of life
that we're all a part of together. Thank
you for being with me today.
>> Thank you, Emmy. It's been a real
pleasure and an honor. Thank you.
>> My pleasure as well. And for those of
you watching or listening, thank you for
being with us because you are the reason
that we are here.
[Music]
[Applause]
Four in the new thinking aloud dialogue
series is Charles T. Tart. 70 years of
exploring consciousness and
parasychology
now available on Amazon.
>> You can now download all eight copies of
the New Thinking Aloud magazine for free
or order beautiful printed copies. Go to
newthinkingaloud.org.